   Chapter 2


   Tokens, Tokenization, and Context
   Windows


  Chapter overview. This opening section explains how large language models convert
  raw text into units they can process. Before a model can classify, retrieve, summarize,
  or answer questions, it must tokenize the input, map tokens to IDs, and place them into
  a limited context window. Those design choices influence model behavior, multilingual
  robustness, memory footprint, latency, and price.
  The move from word-level vocabularies to subword tokenization made modern language
  models far more practical for open-vocabulary tasks. Subword methods such as byte-pair
  encoding and SentencePiece improved handling of rare words, names, spelling variation,
  and multilingual text by breaking text into reusable units rather than requiring a fixed
  dictionary of full words (Sennrich et al., 2016; Kudo & Richardson, 2018).


    Interview Anchor
  What the interviewer is really testing. Whether you can connect tokenization to
  price, latency, multilingual behavior, truncation risk, and prompt design rather than
  treating it as vocabulary trivia.
  Strong answer pattern. Define the token as the real unit of computation, explain why
  tokens are not equal to words, then connect token count to context budgeting, retrieval
  chunking, and output planning.
  Common miss. Candidates often say “the model reads words.” Strong candidates
  mention subwords, special tokens, and the fact that output tokens consume the same
  finite window and budget.




                                          —8—                          AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                                Lamhot Siagian »


      INTERVIEW CHEATSHEET

    Signal to hit           Token count controls cost, latency, truncation, and how much
                            evidence fits beside instructions.
    Best example            Explain why a JSON payload, source code block, or copied PDF
                            text can consume far more tokens than a human expects.
    Follow-up angle         Mention BPE or SentencePiece, then connect tokenization
                            directly to chunk sizing and context-window budgeting.
    What seniors add        They talk about reserving output budget and avoiding retrieval
                            waste from oversized chunks.
    Red flag                Saying “128k context” means 128k words or assuming longer
                            prompts automatically improve answers.


The opening visuals in this chapter stay focused on token flow, context budgeting, and prompt
mechanics. They show where token count becomes an engineering constraint long before the
model generates an answer.

The code sample below is intentionally simple because the main lesson is budgeting. It shows how output
reservation changes the real space left for retrieval and tool context inside a fixed window.

                                                                                 Python Code

  Listing 2.1: A small token-budget helper that is useful in interview demos and prompt design
  discussions.
   def reserve_context(total_window: int, prompt_tokens: int, output_budget: int) -> int:
       """Return how many tokens remain for retrieval and tool context."""
       remaining = total_window - prompt_tokens - output_budget
       return max(remaining, 0)

   window = 128000
   prompt = 1800
   completion_budget = 1200
   retrieval_budget = reserve_context(window, prompt, completion_budget)
   print({"retrieval_budget": retrieval_budget})


      What Strong Candidates Sound Like
   One sentence you can say in an interview. “Tokenization is where human language
   becomes model compute, so it quietly drives cost, latency, retrieval chunking, multilingual
   robustness, and whether the final answer even fits in the window.”


The figure below grounds the tokenization chapter in an end-to-end flow. It shows that tokenization is
not an isolated preprocessing step; it directly shapes the context the model will actually reason over.

The tokenization comparison table below is meant to sharpen trade-off language. Instead of memorizing
names, focus on why each strategy changes vocabulary behavior, multilingual handling, and downstream
cost.



                                               —9—                              AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                               Lamhot Siagian »


   Raw text         Tokenizer          Token IDs          Embeddings         Context window

                   subword splits                                            instructions, history,
                     shape cost                                            retrieved evidence, and
                     and length                                            output budget must fit

                      Figure 2.1: From raw text to model-ready context.

                  Table 2.1: A practical comparison of tokenization strategies

 Approach          Strength                    Limitation
Whitespace /       Simple to inspect           Breaks on rare words, morphology, and many
word-level                                     multilingual cases
Byte-pair          Strong open-vocabulary      Learned merges may be unintuitive to humans
encoding           behavior with compact
                   vocabularies
 SentencePiece     Language-independent,       Still requires evaluation because segmentation
                   trainable from raw text,    choices affect cost and behavior
                   reproducible packaging




  Q1. What is a token and why is it the real unit of computation in an
  LLM?


    Answer
  A token is the unit an LLM actually reads and predicts. In practice, tokens are usually
  not full words. They may be whole words, word pieces, punctuation, whitespace patterns,
  or even character fragments depending on the tokenizer. The model never sees the raw
  sentence directly; it sees a sequence of token IDs.
  Tokens matter because almost every engineering limit is expressed in token terms: context
  length, cost, throughput, latency, retrieval chunk sizes, and output budgets. When an API
  says a model supports 128k context, that means 128k tokens, not 128k words. In interviews,
  the strongest answer is to connect tokenization to both modeling and operations: it is the
  bridge between human text and machine computation.




                                           — 10 —                          AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                            Lamhot Siagian »




  Q2. Why do tokens not map cleanly to words?


    Answer
  Human language is messy. Words contain prefixes, suffixes, punctuation, abbreviations,
  emojis, code fragments, and multilingual patterns that do not fit a clean one-word-equals-
  one-unit rule. A tokenizer therefore breaks text into pieces that are statistically efficient
  for the model rather than linguistically perfect.
  This is why a short-looking phrase can consume many tokens and a long-looking phrase
  can consume fewer. It is also why prompts copied from PDFs, source code, JSON, or
  languages without space-separated words can expand unexpectedly. In production, this
  affects prompt budgets and cost estimation. In interviews, mention that tokenization
  optimizes representational efficiency, not human readability.




  Q3. How does byte-pair encoding help modern language models?


    Answer
  Byte-pair encoding, or BPE, starts from small units and repeatedly merges frequent symbol
  pairs into larger subword units. Over time, common patterns such as ’ing’, ’tion’, or
  domain-specific fragments become reusable vocabulary items. This lets a model represent
  frequent text compactly while still handling rare words compositionally.
  The key advantage is open-vocabulary behavior. Instead of failing on an unseen word, the
  model can decompose it into known pieces. That idea was influential in neural machine
  translation and later became standard in language model pipelines because it improved
  handling of rare and unseen forms without exploding vocabulary size (Sennrich et al.,
  2016).




                                           — 11 —                          AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                          Lamhot Siagian »




  Q4. What is SentencePiece and when is it preferable to classic
  whitespace-based tokenization?


    Answer
  SentencePiece is a tokenizer framework that learns subword units directly from raw text
  instead of assuming the text has already been split into words. That makes it useful for
  multilingual and language-independent pipelines, especially where whitespace is unreliable
  or absent.
  Its practical value is reproducibility and portability. The tokenizer rules, normalization
  behavior, and vocabulary are packaged into one model artifact, so training and inference
  stay consistent across systems. In interviews, a strong answer is that SentencePiece is
  helpful when you want robust, end-to-end tokenization for mixed-language corpora, noisy
  text, or large-scale training pipelines (Kudo & Richardson, 2018).




  Q5. What is a context window?


    Answer
  A context window is the maximum number of tokens the model can attend to during
  one forward pass. It includes the system prompt, user input, retrieved context, tool
  results, conversation history, and generated output budget. If the total exceeds the limit,
  something must be truncated, summarized, or dropped.
  In real systems, the context window is less like a memory palace and more like a working
  desk: only what fits on the desk can be actively used at one time. That is why context
  management is a first-class engineering problem in chat systems, agent loops, and RAG
  pipelines.




                                           — 12 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                            Lamhot Siagian »




  Q6. Why does tokenization directly affect cost and latency?


    Answer
  LLM APIs generally bill per token processed or generated, and transformer attention cost
  grows with sequence length. More tokens means more compute, more memory pressure,
  and higher latency. Two prompts that look similar to a human can differ materially in
  runtime because they tokenize differently.
  This is why experienced engineers measure token counts before shipping prompts, especially
  for long retrieval contexts, structured outputs, or chain-style workflows. A useful interview
  point is that token efficiency is not only a finance issue; it also affects user experience,
  throughput, and whether the system stays stable under load.




  Q7. What happens when an input is longer than the model can accept?


    Answer
  If the input exceeds the context limit, the system must truncate, window, summarize,
  compress, or retrieve selectively. If this is done badly, the model may miss crucial
  instructions or evidence and produce confident but incomplete answers.
  The main engineering lesson is that long context does not eliminate the need for retrieval
  or context management. In production, you rarely want to blindly stuff everything into
  the prompt. You want ranking, chunk selection, and memory policies so the most relevant
  information survives within the budget.




                                            — 13 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                            Lamhot Siagian »




  Q8. What is the difference between truncation, sliding windows, and
  summarization?


    Answer
  Truncation simply drops tokens, usually from the front or back. It is simple but risky
  because it can remove the very instruction or evidence the model needs. Sliding windows
  process long text in overlapping segments so the model can see local neighborhoods without
  consuming the full document at once.
  Summarization compresses earlier content into a shorter representation. That can preserve
  intent better than hard truncation, but it also introduces abstraction loss. In interviews,
  explain the trade-off clearly: truncation is cheapest, sliding windows preserve local detail,
  and summarization preserves gist while sacrificing exact wording.




  Q9. Why are special tokens important in model behavior?


    Answer
  Special tokens act like structural markers. They may indicate beginning-of-sequence,
  end-of-sequence, padding, separator boundaries, instruction turns, image placeholders,
  or tool-use boundaries. Even when users never see them, they shape how the model
  interprets the sequence.
  Many subtle bugs come from mishandling these markers during fine-tuning or inference.
  For example, chat formatting can fail if role boundaries are not represented the way the
  model expects. Strong interview answers mention that tokenization is not only about
  splitting text; it is also about encoding structure.




                                           — 14 —                          AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                               Lamhot Siagian »




   Q10. How should engineers budget tokens in a production LLM system?


      Answer
   A good token budget starts by reserving space for the most expensive and least negotiable
   items: system instructions, required tools, guardrails, output length, and the top retrieved
   passages. Everything else should compete for remaining space based on value. This is
   why retrieval ranking, conversation summarization, and response length caps matter.
   A practical rule is to design prompts backward from the maximum safe budget rather
   than forward from an idealized prompt. In interviews, show that you think operationally:
   estimate average and tail token usage, cap outputs, monitor overflow events, and treat
   token budgets as a reliability control rather than an afterthought.


This tokenizer example is included to make token counting tangible. It connects the earlier theory to
the exact kind of inspection engineers use when prompts unexpectedly become expensive or overflow the
model window.

                                                                                Python Code

                    Listing 2.2: Counting tokens with a Hugging Face tokenizer
   from transformers import AutoTokenizer

   tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained("bert-base-uncased")

   text = "RAG systems trade token budget for grounding quality."
   encoded = tokenizer(text, add_special_tokens=True)

   print(encoded["input_ids"])
   print("token_count =", len(encoded["input_ids"]))




                                              — 15 —                          AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                          Lamhot Siagian »



