
   Chapter 3


   Embeddings and Semantic
   Representations


  Chapter overview. Embeddings convert discrete text into dense vectors that place
  semantically similar items near one another in vector space. They are the backbone of
  semantic search, clustering, reranking, recommendation, and many retrieval-augmented
  generation systems. While tokenization answers ’how do we split text?’, embeddings
  answer ’how do we represent meaning numerically?’
  The practical literature on representation learning showed that useful semantic vectors can
  be trained so that related sentences, documents, or image-text pairs occupy nearby regions
  in embedding space. Sentence-BERT made sentence-level similarity search dramatically
  more efficient than pairwise cross-encoding, while later multimodal work such as CLIP
  extended the same idea across text and images (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019; Radford et
  al., 2021).


    Interview Anchor
  What the interviewer is really testing. Whether you understand that embeddings are
  numerical representations optimized for geometry and task utility, not just fancy vectors
  you call from an API.
  Strong answer pattern. Explain what an embedding captures, why similarity is
  geometric rather than lexical, and how that affects search, clustering, recommendation,
  reranking, and evaluation.
  Common miss. Do not imply that all embedding models are interchangeable. Mention
  task mismatch, domain drift, and the difference between retrieval quality and generation
  quality.




                                           — 16 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                                   Lamhot Siagian »


      INTERVIEW CHEATSHEET

     Signal to hit           Embeddings compress semantic relationships into vector space so
                             distance can stand in for meaning.
     Best example            A retrieval query should retrieve relevant documents even when
                             the wording differs from the source text.
     Follow-up angle         Mention cosine similarity, dense retrieval, and why embedding
                             quality depends on the training objective and domain fit.
     What seniors add        They distinguish first-stage recall from second-stage reranking
                             and evaluation.
     Red flag                Treating vector search as a guaranteed truth mechanism instead
                             of a probabilistic relevance stage.


This embedding figure is included to make the semantic-search pipeline concrete. The important point is
that vector space is only useful because later stages such as search, clustering, and ranking can operate
on it efficiently.


        Text              Embedding model                Vector space             Similarity search




                                                    Clustering / ranking

          Figure 3.1: How semantic representations turn text into retrieval-ready geometry.


The cosine-similarity snippet below keeps the embedding discussion concrete. It demonstrates that semantic
search eventually reduces to numerical comparison, even when the upstream model is sophisticated.

                                                                                    Python Code

            Listing 3.1: A minimal semantic-similarity example using normalized vectors.
   from math import sqrt

   def cosine(a, b):
       dot = sum(x * y for x, y in zip(a, b))
       na = sqrt(sum(x * x for x in a))
       nb = sqrt(sum(y * y for y in b))
       return dot / (na * nb)

   query = [0.30, 0.22, 0.91]
   doc_a = [0.28, 0.20, 0.89]
   doc_b = [0.10, 0.77, 0.14]
   print(cosine(query, doc_a), cosine(query, doc_b))




                                                — 17 —                            AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                            Lamhot Siagian »


    What Strong Candidates Sound Like
  One sentence you can say in an interview. “Embeddings are useful because they
  make semantic proximity measurable, which lets retrieval, clustering, and recommendation
  systems scale beyond exact keyword overlap.”




  Q11. What is an embedding?


    Answer
  An embedding is a dense numerical vector that represents a token, sentence, document,
  image, or other object in a way that preserves useful relationships. Instead of treating text
  as an ID lookup, the model maps it into a continuous space where distance and direction
  can encode semantic similarity.
  In plain terms, embeddings let machines compare meaning without relying only on exact
  keyword matches. That is why they are central to semantic search and retrieval. A strong
  interview answer explains both levels: embeddings are learned numerical representations,
  and their value comes from turning semantic comparison into vector operations.




  Q12. Why do embeddings make semantic search possible?


    Answer
  Semantic search works because relevant items do not need to share the exact same words
  if their embeddings land close together. A query about ’physician salary growth’ can still
  retrieve content written about ’doctor compensation trends’ because the vectors encode
  related meaning rather than strict lexical overlap.
  This makes embeddings especially useful for question answering, support search, and
  long-tail user phrasing. The caveat is that dense similarity can also retrieve conceptually
  adjacent but wrong content, so embedding search is powerful but not automatically precise.
  That is why production systems often add metadata filters, lexical matching, or reranking.




                                            — 18 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                          Lamhot Siagian »




  Q13. What is the difference between token embeddings, sentence
  embeddings, and document embeddings?


    Answer
  Token embeddings represent individual token identities at the model input layer. They
  are part of the model’s internal processing and are not usually used directly for search.
  Sentence embeddings compress a whole sentence into one vector designed for semantic
  comparison. Document embeddings do the same at larger scope, often using pooling or
  chunk-level aggregation.
  The important interview point is to match the representation to the task. Token embed-
  dings are great for internal language modeling, but they are not the same as retrieval
  embeddings. For search and clustering, you usually want sentence or chunk embeddings
  that are explicitly trained to preserve semantic similarity at that level.




  Q14. Why do engineers often L2-normalize embeddings?


    Answer
  Normalization scales vectors to unit length so similarity depends mainly on direction
  rather than raw magnitude. This makes cosine similarity and dot-product behavior more
  consistent and often improves retrieval stability, especially when vector norms vary widely
  across examples.
  In practice, normalization also simplifies index behavior and thresholding. Without it,
  one vector can dominate comparisons because of size rather than meaning. In interviews,
  mention that normalization is not magic; it is a design choice that can improve compara-
  bility, but the right choice depends on how the embedding model was trained and how
  the index computes similarity.




                                           — 19 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                            Lamhot Siagian »




  Q15. When should you use cosine similarity instead of dot product?


    Answer
  Core idea. Use cosine similarity when you want similarity to reflect semantic direction
  rather than raw vector magnitude. Cosine compares the angle between vectors, while dot
  product mixes angle and length, so high-norm vectors can win even when they are not
  truly the closest match in meaning.
  When cosine is usually the safer choice. Prefer cosine when your embedding norms
  vary across examples, when the model documentation recommends cosine-based retrieval,
  or when you want ranking behavior that is less sensitive to scale differences introduced
  during training or preprocessing.
  Expert note. If embeddings are L2-normalized, cosine similarity and dot product become
  equivalent for ranking because every vector has unit length. In production, the real rule is
  consistency: use the metric your embedding model, vector index, and offline evaluation
  pipeline are designed around. A mismatch can quietly change retrieval quality even though
  the embeddings themselves never changed.




  Q16. What are hubness and anisotropy in embedding spaces?


    Answer
  Hubness refers to the tendency of some vectors to appear as nearest neighbors for too many
  queries. Anisotropy means the vector space is unevenly distributed, so many embeddings
  crowd into similar directions. Together, these effects can reduce retrieval quality because
  the index keeps surfacing generic items.
  You do not need to over-theorize this in interviews. A clear answer is that not all embedding
  spaces are equally healthy for nearest-neighbor search. If you see over-retrieval of broad
  or repetitive documents, investigate normalization, fine-tuning quality, negative sampling,
  and reranking rather than assuming the vector database is at fault.




                                            — 20 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                          Lamhot Siagian »




  Q17. What is the difference between dense and sparse representations?


    Answer
  Dense representations are continuous vectors where most dimensions carry nonzero val-
  ues. Sparse representations are high-dimensional signals where only a small number of
  dimensions are active, as in bag-of-words or BM25-style lexical matching. Dense methods
  capture semantic similarity better; sparse methods preserve exact term evidence better.
  In production, this is not a philosophical choice. It is usually a recall-and-precision
  trade-off. Dense search can find conceptually related text, while sparse search protects
  against missing exact terminology, names, codes, or product IDs. That is why hybrid
  retrieval has become the default in many enterprise systems.




  Q18. What is the difference between a bi-encoder and a cross-encoder?


    Answer
  A bi-encoder encodes the query and candidate text independently, then compares their
  vectors. This makes retrieval fast and scalable because candidate vectors can be precom-
  puted. A cross-encoder processes query and candidate together, allowing richer interaction
  but at much higher inference cost.
  A useful mental model is that the bi-encoder is a fast librarian who pulls a shortlist,
  while the cross-encoder is a careful reviewer who reads each shortlisted item alongside the
  query. In interviews, emphasize the common pattern: use a bi-encoder for recall and a
  cross-encoder for reranking.




                                           — 21 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                             Lamhot Siagian »




  Q19. How does embedding dimension affect system design?


    Answer
  Higher-dimensional embeddings can capture richer distinctions, but they also increase
  storage, memory bandwidth, and index cost. Lower-dimensional embeddings are cheaper
  and faster but may lose retrieval fidelity, especially in complex domains.
  The right dimension is therefore a system decision, not just a model choice. In interviews,
  mention the full trade-off: vector size affects index footprint, latency, cache efficiency, and
  re-embedding migration cost. A strong engineer does not ask only ’what is most accurate?’
  but also ’what scales under real traffic?’




  Q20. How do you evaluate an embedding model before using it in
  production?


    Answer
  Evaluate embeddings on the task they will actually support. For retrieval, measure recall at
  k, mean reciprocal rank, normalized discounted cumulative gain, and downstream answer
  quality. For clustering, check purity or manual interpretability. For recommendation,
  assess whether neighbors are meaningfully relevant rather than only numerically close.
  The strongest interview answer is that offline vector similarity alone is not enough.
  Embeddings should be tested inside the full pipeline they will power. Sentence-level
  benchmarks are useful, but the final question is always whether the embeddings improve
  business-relevant retrieval or decision quality (Reimers & Gurevych, 2019).




                                            — 22 —                           AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                          Lamhot Siagian »




