   Chapter 13


   Fine-Tuning, PEFT, and Adaptation
   Strategies


  Chapter overview. Foundation models start broad, but production systems often need
  narrower behavior: better instruction following, domain adaptation, lower latency, or
  more stable outputs. Fine-tuning is one route to that specialization, but it exists on a
  spectrum that includes supervised fine-tuning, instruction tuning, preference optimization,
  and parameter-efficient adaptation such as LoRA (Ouyang et al., 2022; Hu et al., 2021).
  The strongest interview answers separate what fine-tuning can fix from what it cannot.
  Fine-tuning is powerful for behavior shaping and specialization, but it does not replace
  retrieval quality, evaluation discipline, or product-level control.


    Interview Anchor
  What the interviewer is really testing. Can you compare prompt engineering, PEFT,
  LoRA, QLoRA, and full fine-tuning with a budget-aware engineering lens?
  Strong answer pattern. Start with the behavior gap you need to close, then discuss
  adaptation strength, data quality, compute cost, portability, and operational risk.
  Common miss. Do not present LoRA or QLoRA as universally superior. They are
  strong trade-offs, not universal answers.




                                           — 87 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                                 Lamhot Siagian »


      INTERVIEW CHEATSHEET

    Signal to hit           Adaptation strategy should match behavior gap, compute budget,
                            latency target, and deployment flexibility.
    Best example            Use prompt and retrieval improvements first, then PEFT when
                            you need persistent behavior change with moderate cost.
    Follow-up angle         Mention catastrophic forgetting, evaluation sets, and rollback
                            strategy.
    What seniors add        They discuss deployment and governance, not only training
                            mechanics.
    Red flag                Fine-tuning before proving the issue is not actually a retrieval or
                            prompt-design problem.


This adaptation-choice table belongs here because interviewers often ask for the boundary between
prompting, PEFT, and full fine-tuning. The rows help turn that answer into a principled decision instead
of a preference statement.

               Table 13.1: Choosing among prompt changes, PEFT, and full fine-tuning

 Option                Best when               Trade-off

 Prompt and            Behavior gap is         Fastest and safest, but limited for deeper style or
 retrieval updates     mostly instruction      policy adaptation.
                       or evidence related
 LoRA                  You need persistent     Good balance of quality and efficiency for many
                       behavior change         enterprise cases.
                       with manageable
                       compute
 QLoRA                 Hardware is             Attractive for experimentation, but still requires
                       constrained and         disciplined evaluation.
                       memory matters
 Full fine-tuning      Task is critical and    Highest cost and operational complexity.
                       adaptation must
                       be deep


This PEFT configuration snippet is useful because interviews often expect the vocabulary of adapters,
rank, alpha, and target modules. The code anchors those terms in a real configuration shape.

                                                                                  Python Code

   Listing 13.1: A compact PEFT configuration snippet often discussed in adaptation interviews.
   from peft import LoraConfig

   config = LoraConfig(
       r=16,
       lora_alpha=32,
       lora_dropout=0.05,



                                               — 88 —                            AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                                 Lamhot Siagian »



       bias="none",
       target_modules=["q_proj", "v_proj"],
       task_type="CAUSAL_LM",
   )


       What Strong Candidates Sound Like
   One sentence you can say in an interview. “The right adaptation method is the
   cheapest one that reliably closes the measured behavior gap without creating governance
   and maintenance pain.”


This adaptation figure frames fine-tuning as a ladder of intervention. It reminds the reader that prompt
changes, adapters, and full-weight updates are different operating points, not interchangeable defaults.


        Base model        SFT / instruction tune       Preference tune       Policy-ready model


                          full tune or PEFT / LoRA


                Figure 13.1: One simplified view of model adaptation and alignment.


The second adaptation table compares strategies in a more applied way. Use it to discuss infrastructure
load, data requirements, and deployment implications side by side.

                            Table 13.2: Adaptation strategies in practice

 Method                 Best for                Main trade-off
 Prompting              Fast iteration and      Less consistent on hard repeated tasks
                        changing tasks
 Retrieval              Knowledge               Quality depends on evidence selection
                        grounding and
                        freshness
 LoRA / PEFT            Efficient domain or     Still needs data, evaluation, and model
                        task adaptation         management
 Full fine-tuning       Maximum                 Highest compute and maintenance cost
                        specialization




                                               — 89 —                            AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                                Lamhot Siagian »




   Q111. What is the difference between full fine-tuning and
   parameter-efficient fine-tuning?


      Answer
   Full fine-tuning updates all or most model weights, which can deliver strong adaptation
   but is expensive in compute, memory, and deployment complexity. Parameter-efficient
   methods update only a small subset of parameters or add lightweight trainable modules,
   making adaptation much cheaper.
   In interviews, say that PEFT methods are attractive when you need many task variants,
   faster iteration, or lower serving overhead. Full fine-tuning is still valuable when maximal
   task adaptation is required and resources allow it.




   Q112. What are LoRA and QLoRA, and how do they differ?


      Answer
   LoRA, or Low-Rank Adaptation, freezes the base model and learns small low-rank update
   matrices that modify selected transformer weights efficiently. QLoRA keeps the same
   basic adapter idea but combines it with low-bit quantization of the frozen base model so
   much larger models can be fine-tuned within limited memory budgets.
   The practical difference is that LoRA focuses on reducing trainable parameters, while
   QLoRA also focuses aggressively on reducing memory footprint during training. That is
   why QLoRA became so useful for adapting large open models on modest hardware (Hu et
   al., 2021; Dettmers et al., 2023).


The LoRA example expands the configuration idea into a minimal workflow. It helps the reader see the
path from adapter setup to trainable-parameter selection without getting lost in framework boilerplate.

                                                                                 Python Code

                     Listing 13.2: A small PEFT example with LoRA adapters
   from transformers import AutoModelForCausalLM
   from peft import LoraConfig, get_peft_model

   base_model = AutoModelForCausalLM.from_pretrained("meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B")

   config = LoraConfig(




                                               — 90 —                           AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                             Lamhot Siagian »



      r=16,
      lora_alpha=32,
      lora_dropout=0.05,
      target_modules=["q_proj", "v_proj"]
  )

  model = get_peft_model(base_model, config)
  model.print_trainable_parameters()




  Q113. What is the difference between supervised fine-tuning, instruction
  tuning, and preference optimization?


      Answer
  Supervised fine-tuning teaches the model from input-output pairs. Instruction tuning is a
  specialization of that idea where tasks are framed as natural-language instructions so the
  model becomes better at following requests across tasks. Preference optimization uses
  ranked or comparative feedback to push the model toward outputs humans prefer.
  A strong answer is that these methods shape different aspects of behavior. SFT teaches
  task patterns, instruction tuning broadens usability, and preference methods improve
  helpfulness, safety, or style beyond plain imitation (Ouyang et al., 2022).




  Q114. What is model distillation and when is it useful?


      Answer
  Model distillation trains a smaller student model to imitate a larger teacher model, often
  by learning from the teacher’s soft probability distribution rather than only from hard
  labels. The goal is to preserve much of the teacher’s behavior while reducing latency,
  memory use, and deployment cost.
  Distillation is useful when the production constraint is not only accuracy but also efficiency.
  It is common in mobile, edge, or high-throughput systems where a frontier model is too
  expensive to serve directly. In interviews, distinguish distillation from PEFT: distillation
  creates a new smaller model, while PEFT adapts an existing large model more cheaply
  (Hinton et al., 2015).




                                            — 91 —                           AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                             Lamhot Siagian »




  Q115. When is fine-tuning actually worth the effort?


    Answer
  Fine-tuning is worth it when prompting and retrieval have plateaued, the task is stable,
  labeled data is available, and the business case rewards tighter consistency or lower cost
  per request. It is especially compelling when the same behavior must be repeated at scale.
  In interviews, show restraint. Fine-tuning is not automatically the next step after a weak
  prompt. Sometimes the real issue is poor data, bad chunking, or missing tools.




  Q116. What makes a fine-tuning dataset high quality?


    Answer
  High-quality fine-tuning data is clear, representative, correctly labeled, diverse across edge
  cases, and aligned to the exact behavior you want in production. A small clean dataset is
  often more valuable than a large noisy one because the model will faithfully learn your
  inconsistencies too.
  The best interview answer is that data quality defines the ceiling. Fine-tuning amplifies
  the pattern in the data; it does not invent a better target than the one you provide.




                                            — 92 —                          AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                           Lamhot Siagian »




  Q117. What is catastrophic forgetting and why does it matter?


    Answer
  Catastrophic forgetting happens when fine-tuning pushes the model so strongly toward a
  new domain or task that it loses useful general capabilities it previously had. This matters
  when the product still relies on broad reasoning, style range, or knowledge outside the
  fine-tuned examples.
  In interviews, mention mitigation strategies such as balanced data mixes, lighter adaptation
  methods, and evaluation across both new and retained capabilities. Good specialization
  should not unnecessarily destroy general competence.




  Q118. How should you evaluate a fine-tuned model before release?


    Answer
  Evaluate both target-task gains and unintended regressions. That includes task accuracy,
  safety behavior, formatting stability, refusal correctness, latency, and generalization to
  realistic prompts rather than only training-like examples.
  A mature answer is that evaluation should compare the fine-tuned model against the
  baseline model and the cheapest non-fine-tuned alternative. Otherwise you cannot tell
  whether fine-tuning truly earned its complexity.




                                           — 93 —                          AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                           Lamhot Siagian »




  Q119. How does alignment relate to fine-tuning?


    Answer
  Alignment refers to shaping the model so its behavior better matches human intent,
  safety requirements, and product policy. Fine-tuning is one mechanism for alignment, but
  alignment also depends on preference data, guardrails, tools, retrieval constraints, and
  evaluation methods.
  In interviews, explain that alignment is broader than politeness or refusal. It is about
  steering the model toward useful, appropriate, and policy-consistent behavior in the
  context of real applications.




  Q120. What are the main cost trade-offs in fine-tuning projects?


    Answer
  The main costs include data creation, training compute, evaluation effort, model storage,
  serving complexity, and operational maintenance across versions. These costs are justified
  only if the fine-tuned model delivers measurable gains in quality, speed, or cost efficiency
  over prompting alone.
  A strong answer is that fine-tuning has both upfront and lifecycle costs. Teams sometimes
  focus on training cost and forget the long-term burden of managing multiple adapted
  models.




                                           — 94 —                          AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                       Lamhot Siagian »




  Q121. When should a team avoid fine-tuning altogether?


    Answer
  A team should avoid fine-tuning when the task changes rapidly, the dataset is weak, the
  behavior is mostly knowledge retrieval rather than skill adaptation, or the product can
  be solved with better prompting, retrieval, or tool use. Fine-tuning can add complexity
  without solving the actual bottleneck.
  In interviews, this answer signals discipline. Good engineers do not optimize the wrong
  layer of the stack.




                                         — 95 —                        AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                            Lamhot Siagian »




