   Chapter 14


   Optimization and Math Foundations
   for Language Models


  Chapter overview. Interviewers often use mathematical questions to test whether a
  candidate truly understands why transformers work rather than simply repeating system-
  design vocabulary. The goal is rarely to derive every equation from memory. Instead, it is
  to show that you understand how attention scores become probabilities, how gradients
  propagate through embedding tables and linear layers, and why certain functions such as
  cross-entropy or KL divergence appear so often in training pipelines.
  This chapter focuses on the handful of mathematical tools that repeatedly surface in
  LLM work: softmax, dot products, cross-entropy, gradients, Jacobians, eigen-analysis, KL
  divergence, and activation derivatives. The strongest answers explain what the equation
  means operationally and why an engineer should care.


    Interview Anchor
  What the interviewer is really testing. Whether you can explain the training loop
  and optimization choices without losing the practical engineering thread.
  Strong answer pattern. Define the mathematical object, explain what the optimizer is
  trying to reduce, and then connect that to hardware efficiency, stability, and generalization.
  Common miss. Avoid turning the answer into isolated formulas without saying why
  they matter in real systems.




                                            — 96 —                          AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                                   Lamhot Siagian »


      INTERVIEW CHEATSHEET

     Signal to hit           Optimization explains how model parameters move from random
                             initialization toward useful behavior under compute constraints.
     Best example            Cross-entropy, gradients, batch size, and learning rate all matter
                             because they shape stability and convergence speed.
     Follow-up angle         Mention gradient accumulation, optimizer choice, and mixed
                             precision.
     What seniors add        They link math choices to serving cost and model quality.
     Red flag                Quoting equations without tying them to training dynamics or
                             failure modes.


      What Strong Candidates Sound Like
   One sentence you can say in an interview. “The math matters because every
   optimization choice affects not only training loss but also stability, hardware efficiency,
   and what quality level is economically reachable.”


The optimization figure below reduces the training loop to its core mechanics. It is included so the later
math discussion stays attached to gradient flow, loss signals, and parameter updates rather than floating
as abstract formulas.



                                             backpropagation

                          Input          Linear         Softmax           Loss

                     Figure 14.1: A minimal forward-and-backward training view.




                                                — 97 —                            AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                         Lamhot Siagian »




  Q122. How is the softmax function used in attention?


    Answer
  Softmax converts raw similarity scores into a normalized distribution over tokens. In
  self-attention, the model computes similarity scores between a token’s query vector and
  the key vectors of other tokens. Softmax then turns those scores into weights that sum to
  one, allowing the model to blend value vectors proportionally rather than making a hard
  one-token choice.
  The practical intuition is that softmax makes attention differentiable and comparable
  across candidates. Without it, attention scores would be unbounded and much harder to
  interpret as relative importance.




  Q123. Why does the dot product appear in self-attention?


    Answer
  The dot product provides a fast measure of alignment between two vectors. In attention,
  the query-key dot product says, in effect, “How relevant does this other token look to the
  current token?” Larger values imply stronger alignment and therefore larger attention
  weights after softmax.
  A good interview answer also mentions scaling. Because raw dot products grow with
  vector dimension, transformers divide by the square root of the key dimension to keep the
  scores numerically stable during training (Vaswani et al., 2017).




                                          — 98 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                          Lamhot Siagian »




  Q124. Why is cross-entropy the standard loss for language modeling?


    Answer
  Cross-entropy measures how well the predicted probability distribution matches the true
  target distribution. In next-token prediction, the true distribution places almost all
  probability mass on the correct next token, and cross-entropy penalizes the model when it
  assigns that token too little probability.
  Engineers like cross-entropy because it gives clear gradients, works naturally with softmax
  outputs, and aligns training with probabilistic prediction quality. When people mention
  perplexity, they are usually talking about an exponential transform of average cross-
  entropy.




  Q125. How are gradients computed for embeddings during
  backpropagation?


    Answer
  Each token lookup selects a row from the embedding matrix. During backpropagation,
  the loss gradient flows backward into the rows that were used in the forward pass. The
  optimizer then updates those rows so future occurrences of similar contexts produce better
  predictions.
  The intuition is simple: the embedding table is just another trainable parameter matrix.
  The main difference is sparsity. Only the embeddings for tokens present in the batch
  receive direct updates on that step.




                                           — 99 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                         Lamhot Siagian »




  Q126. What does the Jacobian matrix represent in deep learning?


    Answer
  The Jacobian matrix contains all partial derivatives of a vector-valued function with
  respect to its inputs. In deep learning, it tells you how small changes in each input
  dimension affect each output dimension. That matters when a layer transforms one vector
  into another and gradients must be passed back accurately through the transformation.
  Interviewers do not always want a full derivation. Often they want to see whether you
  understand that backpropagation through vector functions depends on structured partial
  derivatives rather than a single scalar slope.




  Q127. How do eigenvalues and eigenvectors connect to dimensionality
  reduction?


    Answer
  In dimensionality reduction methods such as PCA, eigenvectors identify directions of
  variation in the data, and eigenvalues tell you how much variance each direction explains.
  Keeping the leading eigenvectors lets you compress the data while preserving as much of
  the important structure as possible.
  In LLM practice, you do not usually compute PCA inside a transformer. But the idea
  still matters for understanding why lower-dimensional projections, latent spaces, and
  compressed feature representations can retain useful structure.




                                          — 100 —                        AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                         Lamhot Siagian »




  Q128. What is KL divergence and when is it useful in LLM training?


    Answer
  KL divergence measures how one probability distribution differs from another. In LLM
  work, it appears when comparing a model’s predicted distribution to a reference distribu-
  tion, distilling a student model from a teacher, or constraining an updated policy so it
  does not drift too far from a baseline.
  A strong answer is that KL divergence is not a symmetric distance but a directional
  penalty. It matters because language-model training and alignment often depend on
  keeping distributions close in a controlled way rather than only maximizing pointwise
  accuracy.




  Q129. Why does the derivative of ReLU matter in deep networks?


    Answer
  ReLU outputs zero for negative inputs and passes positive inputs through unchanged.
  Its derivative is therefore zero on the negative side and one on the positive side, which
  makes it computationally simple and helps gradients flow better than older saturating
  nonlinearities such as sigmoid in many settings.
  The practical takeaway is not that ReLU is perfect. It is that its derivative avoids some
  of the severe shrinking behavior that made earlier deep networks hard to optimize. That
  historical lesson still matters when discussing vanishing gradients.




                                         — 101 —                        AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                                 Lamhot Siagian »




   Q130. How does the chain rule make backpropagation possible?


      Answer
   Neural networks are compositions of many functions. The chain rule lets us compute the
   derivative of the whole composition by multiplying local derivatives step by step from the
   output layer back to the input. Backpropagation is essentially the efficient bookkeeping of
   that repeated chain-rule application.
   In interviews, frame the chain rule as the logic that turns deep models from black boxes
   into trainable systems. Without it, there would be no practical way to assign credit or
   blame to earlier layers for a final prediction error.




   Q131. How do residual connections and normalization help with
   vanishing gradients?


      Answer
   Residual connections create short paths through which gradients can flow directly, re-
   ducing the chance that the signal disappears as it moves backward through many layers.
   Normalization helps keep activations and updates in stable numerical ranges, making
   optimization less brittle.
   Transformers benefit from this combination because deep attention stacks would otherwise
   become much harder to train reliably. A strong interview answer links the math to the
   engineering outcome: these mechanisms are part of why very deep transformer models are
   practical at all.


This loss-function example is included to keep optimization math interpretable. The formulas matter, but
the code helps the reader tie them back to probability distributions and training signals.

                                                                                  Python Code

             Listing 14.1: A tiny Python example for cross-entropy and KL divergence
   import numpy as np

   target = np.array([0.0, 1.0, 0.0])
   pred   = np.array([0.1, 0.8, 0.1])
   eps = 1e-12




                                               — 102 —                           AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                        Lamhot Siagian »



  cross_entropy = -(target * np.log(pred + eps)).sum()

  teacher = np.array([0.05, 0.9, 0.05])
  kl = (teacher * (np.log(teacher + eps) - np.log(pred + eps))).sum()

  print(f"cross_entropy={cross_entropy:.4f}")
  print(f"kl_divergence={kl:.4f}")




                                          — 103 —                       AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                         Lamhot Siagian »




