   Chapter 15


   Text Generation, Decoding, and
   Serving at Scale


  Chapter overview. Generation is the visible part of an LLM system, but good generation
  depends on many hidden engineering choices. Decoding controls how the next token
  is selected, while serving infrastructure controls how quickly and reliably responses are
  delivered under load. Research on neural text degeneration showed that naive likelihood-
  maximizing decoding can produce repetitive, low-quality text, which is why modern
  systems carefully tune sampling strategies (Holtzman et al., 2020).
  This chapter ties model behavior to deployment reality: throughput, latency, streaming,
  KV caching, quantization, long-context serving, and safety controls.


    Interview Anchor
  What the interviewer is really testing. Whether you understand that decoding
  quality and serving reliability are coupled decisions.
  Strong answer pattern. Explain decoding controls, latency trade-offs, batching, stream-
  ing, caching, and observability as one serving system.
  Common miss. Candidates often answer only with temperature and top-p. Senior
  answers include throughput, queueing, safety, and monitoring.


    INTERVIEW CHEATSHEET

   Signal to hit        Decoding is not purely stylistic; it changes quality, determinism,
                        speed, and user experience.
   Best example         The right decoding setup for deterministic extraction is very
                        different from exploratory brainstorming or creative writing.
   Follow-up angle      Mention streaming, batching, cache reuse, and service-level
                        objectives.
   What seniors add     They describe how generation controls interact with
                        infrastructure cost.
   Red flag             Treating serving as separate from model behavior.




                                         — 104 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                                  Lamhot Siagian »


      What Strong Candidates Sound Like
   One sentence you can say in an interview. “A good generation service balances
   decoding quality, streaming responsiveness, and infrastructure efficiency because users feel
   all three at once.”

This generation-service figure closes the loop from model output to user delivery. It helps the chapter
discuss decoding, serving, and monitoring as one operational path instead of three separate concerns.


         Request       Assembly        Inference      Streaming       Moderate       Logs / evals

         Figure 15.1: A simplified generation service path from request to monitored delivery.


The decoding-controls table keeps the generation chapter operational. It shows that sampling settings are
user-experience and safety levers, not merely academic parameters.

                               Table 15.1: Common decoding controls

 Control              Primary effect         Practical note
 Temperature          Changes                Lower for determinism, higher for diversity
                      randomness of the
                      next-token
                      distribution
 Top-k                Restricts              Useful as a hard cap on tail exploration
                      candidates to the
                      top k tokens
 Top-p                Samples from a         Often a strong default for natural text generation
                      cumulative-
                      probability
                      nucleus
 Max tokens           Caps output            Important for cost and latency control
                      length




                                               — 105 —                           AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                                 Lamhot Siagian »




   Q132. How do temperature, top-k, and top-p change model outputs?


      Answer
   Temperature rescales the token probability distribution, making outputs more deterministic
   when lowered and more diverse when raised. Top-k limits sampling to the k highest-
   probability tokens. Top-p, or nucleus sampling, limits sampling to the smallest set of
   tokens whose cumulative probability exceeds p.
   In interviews, explain these as decoding controls, not as magical creativity knobs. They
   change the trade-off between determinism, diversity, and risk of error. Nucleus sampling
   became especially important because it helps avoid low-probability tail tokens that can
   degrade text quality (Holtzman et al., 2020).




   Q133. How does beam search compare with greedy decoding?


      Answer
   Greedy decoding always picks the single highest-probability next token at each step. Beam
   search keeps several candidate continuations alive and expands them in parallel, which
   gives the system a chance to recover from locally attractive but globally poor choices.
   This can improve coherence in tasks such as translation or constrained generation.
   The trade-off is that beam search costs more compute and still optimizes a narrow
   probability objective, so it is not automatically better for all open-ended tasks. In
   interviews, say that generation is a search problem: greedy decoding is the cheapest search,
   while beam search is a broader but still limited search over candidate continuations.

The sampling snippet below belongs in the serving chapter because decoding choices are product controls.
It shows how one generation call exposes temperature, top-p, and token-budget decisions at the API edge.

                                                                                  Python Code

                    Listing 15.1: Sampling controls in a text-generation pipeline
   from transformers import pipeline

   generator = pipeline("text-generation", model="gpt2")

   result = generator(
       "Explain retrieval-augmented generation in simple terms:",




                                              — 106 —                           AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                           Lamhot Siagian »



      max_new_tokens=120,
      temperature=0.7,
      top_k=40,
      top_p=0.9,
      do_sample=True
  )

  print(result[0]["generated_text"])




  Q134. Why is streaming generation important in user-facing systems?


      Answer
  Streaming lets the system return tokens incrementally instead of waiting for the full
  response. This improves perceived latency, keeps users engaged, and allows interfaces to
  feel responsive even when the total generation time is significant.
  In interviews, mention both UX and systems implications. Streaming also changes
  cancellation behavior, error handling, and partial-output policies, so it is not merely a
  frontend trick.




  Q135. How do batching and concurrency improve serving efficiency?


      Answer
  Batching allows multiple requests to share accelerator work, improving hardware utilization.
  Concurrency strategies help the server manage many active sessions without starving
  some users. Together they can raise throughput substantially, especially for high-volume
  inference.
  The trade-off is latency. Larger batches improve efficiency but may delay individual
  requests. Strong interview answers frame serving as a balance between tail latency and
  cluster utilization.




                                          — 107 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                            Lamhot Siagian »




  Q136. What is the KV cache and why does it matter for autoregressive
  decoding?


    Answer
  In autoregressive decoding, the model repeatedly attends over prior tokens. The KV cache
  stores previously computed key and value tensors so the system does not recompute them
  for every generated token. This makes generation much faster, especially for long prompts
  and long outputs.
  In interviews, say that the KV cache is one of the most important serving optimizations
  for decoder-only models. It converts redundant repeated computation into reusable state.




  Q137. How does quantization help deploy large models?


    Answer
  Quantization reduces the numerical precision of model weights and sometimes activations,
  which lowers memory usage and can improve inference speed. This can make large models
  fit on cheaper hardware or increase the number of concurrent requests a server can handle.
  The interview-safe answer is that quantization is an engineering trade-off. It often delivers
  major efficiency gains, but quality must be validated because aggressive compression can
  degrade output fidelity on some tasks.




                                           — 108 —                          AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                           Lamhot Siagian »




  Q138. How should engineers think about throughput versus latency?


    Answer
  Throughput measures how much total work the system can do over time, while latency
  measures how long one request takes. Optimizing one can hurt the other. A highly batched
  cluster may be throughput-efficient while still feeling slow to users.
  In interviews, say that the right objective depends on the product. Internal batch workloads
  may prioritize throughput; interactive copilots may prioritize first-token latency and tail
  latency.




  Q139. What makes long-context serving difficult?


    Answer
  Long-context serving is difficult because memory and attention costs grow with sequence
  length, prompts are more expensive to process, and the risk of context dilution rises. Even
  when a model supports long context, using all of it on every request can be wasteful or
  harmful.
  A strong answer connects this back to retrieval and context design. Longer context is a
  capability, not a default operating mode.




                                           — 109 —                         AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                             Lamhot Siagian »




  Q140. How do safety and moderation fit into generation pipelines?


    Answer
  Safety controls can be applied before, during, and after generation. Inputs may be
  screened, tools may be permission-gated, decoding may be constrained, and outputs may
  be moderated or validated before delivery. In sensitive applications, unsafe or unsupported
  generations should trigger refusal or human review.
  In interviews, explain safety as a pipeline property rather than a single classifier. Reliable
  systems layer multiple controls because no single mechanism catches everything.




  Q141. How would you describe a scalable LLM generation service in
  system-design terms?


    Answer
  A scalable generation service usually includes request routing, authentication, prompt
  assembly, retrieval or tool orchestration, model serving, streaming delivery, logging, caching,
  safety checks, and evaluation feedback loops. It may also use tiered model routing so
  simple tasks go to cheaper models and harder tasks go to stronger ones.
  The best interview answer is architectural. Show that you can connect model behavior to
  queues, autoscaling, observability, guardrails, and rollback strategy. That is what turns
  model access into a product service.




                                            — 110 —                          AI Engineering Insider
Language Models Interview Handbook                                        Lamhot Siagian »




